Rifampicin is an antibiotic used for the treatment of mycobacterium infections, including tuberculosis and leprosy. For the investigation of DDIs, rifampicin is an established potent inducer of multiple drug metabolizing enzymes (CYP3A4, CYP2B6, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, CYP2C19) and transporters (P-gp, MRP2, MRP3, MRP4, OATP1A2). In addition to its inducing capabilities, rifampicin also competitively inhibits enzymes and transporters like CYP3A4, P-gp, OATP1B1 and OATP1B3.

The herein presented model represents the rifampicin model originally published by Hanke *et al.* ([Hanke 2018](#5-References)), and extended in later publications ([Britz 2019](#5-References), [Türk 2019](#5-References)). The model was originally established using various clinical studies, covering a dosing range of 300 to 600 mg after intravenous and oral administration of rifampicin. The original model focused specifically on the integration of effects on **CYP3A4** and **P-gp** by rifampicin. Britz *et al.* ([Britz 2019](#5-References)) integrated rifampicin-mediated induction of **CYP1A2** (and CYP2E1) and Türk *et al.* ([Türk 2019](#5-References)) extended the model with regard to effects on **CYP2C8** and **OATP1B1**.

It is known that for both CYP3A4 and P-gp, rifampicin shows inductive and inhibitory effects. While induction by rifampicin involves gene expression and therefore takes several days to fully develop, competitive inhibition has an instantaneous effect and is strongest at the time of highest exposure to the inhibitor. As a consequence, the effects of rifampicin caused via competitive inhibition are most prominent 1-2 h after its oral administration and of relatively short duration. These opposing effects of rifampicin can be reasonably considered in PBPK models. 

Integrating and testing processes that were described as vital to the pharmacokinetics of rifampicin itself resulted in a final model that applies transport by OATP1B1, metabolism by arylacetamide deacetylase (AADAC), transport by P-gp and glomerular filtration. Furthermore, auto-induction of OATP1B1, AADAC and P-gp expression has been incorporated.

